Migrate yum repo script troubleshooting guide (software-3058) (#193)
opensciencegrid/operations: docs/troubleshooting/repository-scripts.md

Troubleshooting Guide for Yum Repository Scripts
================================================

The *repo.opensciencegrid.org* and *repo-itb.opensciencegrid.org* hosts contain the OSG Yum software repositories plus related services and tools. In particular, the *mash* software is used to download RPMs from where they are built (at the University of Wisconsin–Madison), and there are some associated scripts to configure and invoke *mash* periodically. Use this guide to monitor the *mash* system for problems and to perform basic troubleshooting when such problems arise.

Monitoring 
----------

To monitor the repository hosts for proper *mash* operation, do the following steps on each host:

>    1. Access http://repo1.grid.iu.edu/web/log/ or http://repo2.grid.iu.edu/web/log/ to view logs from *mash* updates

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   1. `ssh` to repo.opensciencegrid.org and `cd` into `/var/log/repo` to view logs from *mash* updates
```

>    1. Examine the “Last modified” timestamp of all of the *update\_repo.\*.log* files  
>        **Note:** The timestamps are displayed in UTC, so convert to local time accordingly</p>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   1. Examine the “Last modified” timestamp of all of the *update\_repo.\*.log* files  
```

   1. If **all** timestamps are more than 6 hours old, something may be wrong with cron or its mash entries:
      1. If possible, verify that cron is running and that the cron entries for mash are still present; if not, try to restore things
      1. Otherwise, create a GOC ticket with a subject like “Repo update logs are too old on repo**N**” and with relevant details in the body
      1. Assign the ticket to “Software Support (Triage)”
      1. Email Carl Edquist <edquist@cs.wisc.edu> and CC Tim Cartwright <cat@cs.wisc.edu> with the ticket URL

Troubleshooting and Mitigation
------------------------------
<style type="text/css">
  em.pgid { color: red; font-weight: bold; }
  em.start { color: blue; font-weight: bold; }
</style>

### Identifying and fixing a hung mash process

If a mash update process hangs, all future invocations from cron of the mash scripts will exit without taking action because of the hung process. Thus, it is important to identify and remove any hung processes so that future updates can proceed. Use the procedure below to remove any hung mash processes; doing so is safe in that it will not adversely affect the Yum repositories being served from the host.

> 1. On the web listing of log files (see above), click on the =update_all_repos.err= link

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. In the listing of log files (see above), view the file =update_all_repos.err=
```

Troubleshooting Guide for Yum Repository Scripts
================================================

About This Guide
----------------

The *repo1.grid.iu.edu* and *repo2.grid.iu.edu* hosts contain the OSG Yum software repositories plus related services and tools. In particular, the *mash* software is used to download RPMs from where they are built (at the University of Wisconsin–Madison), and there are some associated scripts to configure and invoke *mash* periodically. Use this guide to monitor the *mash* system for problems and to perform basic troubleshooting when such problems arise.

Monitoring 
----------

To monitor the repository hosts for proper *mash* operation, do the following steps on each host:

>    1. Access http://repo1.grid.iu.edu/web/log/ or http://repo2.grid.iu.edu/web/log/ to view logs from *mash* updates

Reviewer: Right - these used to be served under /web/log/ when they ran on the grid.iu hosts; now they do not seem to be served, but you can find them on the repo host under `/var/log/repo`

>    1. Access http://repo1.grid.iu.edu/web/log/ or http://repo2.grid.iu.edu/web/log/ to view logs from *mash* updates

Reviewer 2: @edquist please make a GitHub suggestion to fix this step!

   1. Examine the “Last modified” timestamp of all of the *update\_repo.\*.log* files  

>        **Note:** The timestamps are displayed in UTC, so convert to local time accordingly</p>

Reviewer: The "displayed in UTC" part was true when the directory listing was served as a web page; but yeah if you are logging in directly then the file timestamps are according to the system time.  (You can run `date` to get the timezone, which for me currently shows `CDT`.) You can do something like `-lt update_repo.*.log` from `/var/log/repo` to check the log timestamps.

   1. If the timestamps are all less than 2 hours old, life is good and you can skip the remaining steps below
   1. Otherwise, examine the “Last modified” timestamp of the *update\_all\_repos.err* file
   1. If the *update\_all\_repos.err* timestamp is current, there may be a *mash* process that is hung; see the Troubleshooting steps below
   1. If **all** timestamps are more than 6 hours old, something may be wrong with cron or its mash entries:

>       1. If possible, verify that cron is running and that the cron entries for mash are still present; if not, try to restore things

Reviewer: @brianhlin,

> edquist IIRC, you're the original author

Nope! That was TimC's word-smithing:

https://github.com/edquist/osg-twiki-backup/commit/39344190367c297851822a7cac6e4992d3e24929#diff-2a528db9d3952a5339e2a69509397978R21

But, i presume his "if not" meant something like "if cron is not running or the cron entries for mash are not still present", and then "try to restore things" meant something like, "try to make it so that cron is running again, and/or restore the missing cron entries for mash (either by un-commenting lines from the repo cron file, or by restoring the original repo cron file from the rpm)"

But yeah, the suggestion to drop "If possible, " does make the "if not" less confusing.

      1. Otherwise, create a GOC ticket with a subject like “Repo update logs are too old on repo**N**” and with relevant details in the body
      1. Assign the ticket to “Software Support (Triage)”
      1. Email Carl Edquist <edquist@cs.wisc.edu> and CC Tim Cartwright <cat@cs.wisc.edu> with the ticket URL

Troubleshooting and Mitigation
------------------------------
<style type="text/css">
  em.pgid { color: red; font-weight: bold; }
  em.start { color: blue; font-weight: bold; }
</style>

### Identifying and fixing a hung mash process

If a mash update process hangs, all future invocations from cron of the mash scripts will exit without taking action because of the hung process. Thus, it is important to identify and remove any hung processes so that future updates can proceed. Use the procedure below to remove any hung mash processes; doing so is safe in that it will not adversely affect the Yum repositories being served from the host.

> 1. On the web listing of log files (see above), click on the =update_all_repos.err= link

Reviewer: Right, basically all the non-empty `*.err` files under `/var/log/repo` can be inspected manually (with, eg, `less`, `cat`)

1. In the error log file, look for messages such as:  

        :::file
        Wed Jan 20 18:10:02 UTC 2016: **Can't acquire lock, is update_all_repos.sh already running?**  
 
    This message indicates that the most recent update attempt quit early due to the presence of a lock file, most likely from a hung *mash* process.
 
1. Log on to the host as *root* or with your regular user account
1. Look for *mash* processes:  
   
        :::console

>         root@host # ps -C mash -o pid,ppid,pgid,start,command
>         PID  PPID  PGID STARTED COMMAND
>         24551 2454923455 Jan 15 /usr/bin/python /usr/bin/mash osg-3.1-el5-release -o
>         24552 2455123455 Jan 15 /usr/bin/python /usr/bin/mash osg-3.1-el5-release -o

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        root@host # ps -C mash -o pid,ppid,pgid,start,command
          PID  PPID  PGID  STARTED COMMAND
        24551 24549 23455  Jan 15 /usr/bin/python /usr/bin/mash osg-3.1-el5-release -o
        24552 24551 23455  Jan 15 /usr/bin/python /usr/bin/mash osg-3.1-el5-release -o
```

> 1. If there are *mash* processes that started on a previous date or more than 2 hours ago, it is best to remove their corresponding process groups (PGID, highlighted above):  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. If there are *mash* processes that started on a previous date or more than 2 hours ago, it is best to remove their corresponding process groups (PGID above):  
```

    
        :::console
        root@host # kill -TERM -23455
       
    Then verify that the old processes are gone using the same *ps* command as above:

        :::console  
        root@host # ps -C mash -o pid,ppid,pgid,start,command
        PID  PPID  PGID  STARTED COMMAND

1. If any part of this process does not look or work as expected:
   1. Create a GOC ticket with a subject like “Problems with mash on repo<strong>N</strong>” and with relevant details in the body
   1. Assign the ticket to “Software Support (Triage)”

>    1. Email Carl Edquist <edquist@cs.wisc.edu> and CC Tim Cartwright <cat@cs.wisc.edu> with the ticket URL

Reviewer 2: Replace this with the same ticket creation text from above, after it's been fixed
